Nature@Cloud
Cloud Computing and Virtualization
Project - 2025-26
MEIC / METI / MECD - IST - ULisboa

1 Introduction
The goal of this project is to design and implement a service hosted in an elastic public cloud to give support
to the execution of a set of parametrized workloads inspired in Nature. The service is meant to execute
a number of computationally-intensive tasks that are Nature inspired, namely: Julia-set fractal generation;
Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion; DNA-matching of FASTA sequences. You are given an already built simplified
Java application (solely aimed at generating a realistic CPU load) that handles the following types of requests:
• fractals: generates a fractal image, based on image width, height, and number of iterations of the Julia
function.
• grayscott: simulates Gray-Scott-based interaction of chemicals, based on region size, max iterations,
substance feed and kill rates, stopping condition on extinction, and seed mode (original distribution).
• dna: a DNA Genome Matcher highlighting DNA matches, based on two FASTA sequences, minimum
match length, and stopping condition on the first match.
With this application, your task is to deploy it in the cloud and scale it by increasing or decreasing the
number of workers according to the number and complexity of user requests. You will be using two types of
cloud deployments: EC2 instances and Lambda functions. Note that while EC2 instances are cheaper per
processed request, they suffer from a longer startup time. On the other hand, Lambdas are more expensive
per processed request but fast to start. Therefore, you need to balance invocations between the two types
of deployments to minimize request latency and cost. Measuring the complexity of requests will be done
by instrumenting the application code with Javassist. Complexity is an estimate of the amount of work
involved in processing the request. As you will notice, simply using processing time instead of estimating the
complexity won’t help since processing time quickly becomes unpredictable when multiple tasks execute at
the same time and compete for possibly overcommitted resources. The project specification is accompanied
by a Frequently Asked Questions document available at: https://tinyurl.com/CNV-25-26-FAQ.
2 Architecture
The Nature@Cloud system should run within the Amazon Web Services ecosystem. The system (see Figure 1)
will be organized in four main components:
• Workers receive web requests to perform a Nature@Cloud operation. There will be a varying number
of identical VMs and Lambdas running Nature@Cloud operations;
• Load Balancer (LB) is the entry point of the system. It receives all web requests, and for each one,
it selects an active VM to serve the request and forwards it to that server. In alternative, it can also
trigger a Lambda function invocation;
Figure 1: Architecture of Nature@Cloud

• Auto-Scaler (AS) is in charge of collecting system performance metrics and, based on them, adjusting
the number of active VM instances;
• Metrics Storage System (MSS) uses Amazon DynamoDB to store request performance metrics.
These will help the LB choose the most appropriate worker.
2.1 Workers
Workers are responsible for executing operations. If workers fail, the LB should handle this and hide failures
from users. In Nature@Cloud , there are two types of workers: VM workers (EC2 instances), and FaaS workers
(Lambda invocations), depicted in Figure 1. VM workers must execute Nature@Cloud code instrumented with
Javassist, while in FaaS workers this is optional. It is your task to use the JavassistAgent tool to instrument
request handling to extract execution metrics regarding request complexity. The main difference between
both types of workers is how the invocation is performed. Workers should not invoke any platform-specific
interfaces to maximize portability.
VM workers implement a web server that receives requests directly from the LB. These requests include
the input and parameters which are then passed to the application code. The result is returned to the LB
and then returned to the user.
FaaS workers implement an invocation handler that receives Lambda invocations triggered by the LB.
Similarly to VM worker requests, Lambda invocations include an input and parameters and return an output
after applying the requested operation.
2.2 Load Balancer (LB)
The LB is the only entry point into the system. It receives requests and either selects one of the active
VM workers to handle each of the requests or triggers a Lambda invocation, based on request complexity
estimation. Note that in the final delivery, the LB should itself be a VM instance running a web server
that uses metrics obtained in earlier requests (stored in the MSS) to decide how and where to execute (i.e.
schedule) requests. You can assume that the LB instance never fails, thus no LB replication is needed here.
The LB should estimate the approximate complexity of requests based on the requests’ parameters combined with data previously stored in the MSS. The LB may record and monitor which VM workers are busy
and how much, how many requests there are currently executing in each VM, and how much work is left in
each VM taking into account a request complexity estimate.
2.3 Auto Scaler (AS)
For this project, you will design an auto-scaling component that decides how many web server nodes should be
active at any given moment. You should design and implement an auto-scaling strategy that provides the best
balance between performance and cost. The AS should detect that the VM workers are overloaded and start
new instances and, on the other hand, reduce the number of nodes when the load decreases. For simplicity,
you can deploy both the AS and the LB code in the same VM (and in the same web server application).
2.4 Metrics Storage System (MSS)
Nature@Cloud should also include a Metrics Storage System that stores metrics collected from the worker
nodes regarding the cost/complexity of requests. These metrics result from running instrumented code which
collects relevant dynamic performance metrics regarding the application code executed (e.g. number of
bytecode instructions or basic blocks executed, data accesses, number of function calls executed, and/or
others deemed relevant). These metrics allow estimating the task complexity realistically, irrespective of
variable wall-clock time delays that can be caused by frequent resource overcommit.
The final choice of the metrics extracted, instrumentation code, and structure used to store the metrics
data is thus subject to analysis and decision by the students. As extracting each metric adds overhead due
to the execution of the added instrumented code, students should consider the usefulness/overhead trade-offs

of each and all utilized metrics. The selected storage system can be updated directly or you may resort to
some intermediate transfer mechanism. For realism, you must take into account that continuously querying
and exhaustively iterating this storage system is expensive and may also become a performance bottleneck
for the LB.
3 Design and Implementation Guidelines
• Automate all cloud deployments and delete all cloud resources after each work session;
• Design and experiment with your instrumentation code locally on your or lab PCs to save resources;
• For simplicity, use t3.micro VM instance types and Lambdas with 512 MB of RAM.
• There are multiple possible design options for each of the components required for the project.
– As important as the picked design is the reason for picking it, understand and explain it!
4 Checkpoint
Students may submit an initial implementation of their system by May 22nd, 23h59 (submission instructions to be provided in the Labs Section in Fenix). This version should support running Nature@Cloud on
multi-threaded VM workers, with at least an AWS-configured LB and AS operating (no need for lambdas at
this stage). Instrumentation gathering metrics should be working. Ideally, it should also include an initial
version of your LB and AS code or pseudocode. Note that the algorithms for load balancing, auto scaling
may not be fully implemented at this stage. However, it is expected that some logic is already thought out
even if simplified.
The checkpoint submission bundle must include an intermediate report (1-page, double column) clearly
describing: a) what is already developed and running in the current implementation (architecture, data
structures and algorithms); b) the specification of what remains to be implemented or completed (namely
pseudo-code for your final LB and AS algorithms). Students must also provide the link to a short video
demonstrating the functionality of the submitted code against a series of tests to be provided. The report
should be submitted until 23:59 on May 23th.
5 Final Submission
The final submission is to be delivered by June 5th, 23h59 (submission instructions to be provided in the
Labs Section in Fenix). It should include a complete implementation of the system. In addition to
the checkpoint, the project should include: i) an instrumentation tool that balances the instrumentation
overhead with the precision of the extracted information; ii) an auto scaling algorithm that handles cost and
performance efficiently; iii) a load balancing algorithm that minimizes cost and request latency using request
complexity estimates based on previous requests.
Student groups should write a final report (up to six double column pages after the cover) describing the
implemented solution, clearly explaining and justifying the algorithms, as well as any results, measurements,
charts and analysis that support the design decisions and configurations. Groups are encouraged to provide
information about the experiments conducted while experimenting with different design tradeoffs (e.g., charts,
datasets). Students must also provide the link to a video demonstrating the functionality of the project
against a series of tests to be provided. The report should submitted until 23:59 on June 6th.
Note: The project should reflect your own work on design, creativity, development and writing. Hence, you
should not rely on any outside people, sites, apps, tools, systems, etc. to carry out such tasks that are the
core learning goals of the project.
